docs/modules/galaxy/index.md, before:

# What is Galaxy Australia?

## What is Galaxy?

Galaxy is a web-based analysis and workflow platform.

  * Designed for biologists
  * Easily accessible via a web page
  * Free to use
  * You can upload your own data
  * You can access shared data
  * Use common bioinformatics tools
  * Develop workflows


## What does Galaxy look like?

  * <ss>Tools</ss> on the left
  * <ss>Viewing</ss> panel in the middle
  * <ss>History</ss> of analysis and files on the right

  ![galaxy overview screenshot](images/galaxy-panel.png)

## Can I use Galaxy?

Yes!

  * Galaxy is free to use and available for everyone.
  * Australian researchers may find Galaxy Australia particularly suited to their analysis needs as it has been developed in consultation with scientists across the country.

## What is Galaxy Australia?

Galaxy Australia has been developed for Australian researchers. It replaces the previous servers called Galaxy-Qld and Galaxy-Mel.

* Where are the other Galaxy servers?
    * A list of Galaxy servers is [here](https://galaxyproject.org/public-galaxy-servers/).
* What is on the other Galaxy servers?
    * Some have a set of general tools, and some have been developed for particular analyses.
* Can I use more than one Galaxy server?
    * Yes, but you will need to register separately for each one, and they don't share data between them.

## Log in

* Open your internet browser.
* Use Safari, Chrome or Firefox. Don't use Internet Explorer.
* Type in the address of Galaxy Australia: [usegalaxy.org.au](https://usegalaxy.org.au/)
* The first time you use Galaxy Australia, click on the <ss>Login or Register</ss> tab and select <ss>Register</ss>.
* Enter the details required and click <ss>Submit</ss>.
* Log in, and refresh the page.

![galaxylogin](images/galaxy-login.png)


- Each time you use this Galaxy server, log in to see your data and histories.
- If you are using a different Galaxy server, you would need to register/log in to that server.

## Use tools

* Available tools are in the left hand panel. Find the tool you want or use the search bar at the top of the tools.

* Click on the tool you want to use.

* The tool interface will appear in the centre Galaxy panel. Check the settings.

* Click <ss>Execute</ss>.

* When the tool has finished, output file(s) will appear at the top of your "Current History" in the right hand panel.

* Click on the eye icon next to a file to view it.

* To access older histories, use the button at the top right of the History panel.


## More information

More information about the Galaxy project can be found [here](https://galaxyproject.org/).

## What's next?

To use the tutorials on this website:

* &#8592; see the list in the left hand panel
* &#8598; or, click the **menu button** (three horizontal bars) in the top left of the page

You can find more tutorials at the Galaxy Training Network:

* [http://galaxyproject.github.io/training-material/](http://galaxyproject.github.io/training-material/)

Commit message:

added a help link to the get started page

docs/modules/galaxy/index.md, after:

# What is Galaxy Australia?

## What is Galaxy?

Galaxy is a web-based analysis and workflow platform.

  * Designed for biologists
  * Easily accessible via a web page
  * Free to use
  * You can upload your own data
  * You can access shared data
  * Use common bioinformatics tools
  * Develop workflows


## What does Galaxy look like?

  * <ss>Tools</ss> on the left
  * <ss>Viewing</ss> panel in the middle
  * <ss>History</ss> of analysis and files on the right

  ![galaxy overview screenshot](images/galaxy-panel.png)

## Can I use Galaxy?

Yes!

  * Galaxy is free to use and available for everyone.
  * Australian researchers may find Galaxy Australia particularly suited to their analysis needs as it has been developed in consultation with scientists across the country.

## What is Galaxy Australia?

Galaxy Australia has been developed for Australian researchers. It replaces the previous servers called Galaxy-Qld and Galaxy-Mel.

* Where are the other Galaxy servers?
    * A list of Galaxy servers is [here](https://galaxyproject.org/public-galaxy-servers/).
* What is on the other Galaxy servers?
    * Some have a set of general tools, and some have been developed for particular analyses.
* Can I use more than one Galaxy server?
    * Yes, but you will need to register separately for each one, and they don't share data between them.

## Log in

* Open your internet browser.
* Use Safari, Chrome or Firefox. Don't use Internet Explorer.
* Type in the address of Galaxy Australia: [usegalaxy.org.au](https://usegalaxy.org.au/)
* The first time you use Galaxy Australia, click on the <ss>Login or Register</ss> tab and select <ss>Register</ss>.
* Enter the details required and click <ss>Submit</ss>.
* Log in, and refresh the page.

![galaxylogin](images/galaxy-login.png)


- Each time you use this Galaxy server, log in to see your data and histories.
- If you are using a different Galaxy server, you would need to register/log in to that server.

## Use tools

* Available tools are in the left hand panel. Find the tool you want or use the search bar at the top of the tools.

* Click on the tool you want to use.

* The tool interface will appear in the centre Galaxy panel. Check the settings.

* Click <ss>Execute</ss>.

* When the tool has finished, output file(s) will appear at the top of your "Current History" in the right hand panel.

* Click on the eye icon next to a file to view it.

* To access older histories, use the button at the top right of the History panel.


## More information and help

More information about the Galaxy project can be found [here](https://galaxyproject.org/).

[Click here for more help.](../help/index.md)

## What's next?

To use the tutorials on this website:

* &#8592; see the list in the left hand panel
* &#8598; or, click the **menu button** (three horizontal bars) in the top left of the page

You can find more tutorials at the Galaxy Training Network:

* [http://galaxyproject.github.io/training-material/](http://galaxyproject.github.io/training-material/)
